I'll ask you to explain what a pastiche is.
Let me ask you the question, okay?
Dr. Kreider, could you explain what a pastiche is and what problems come up with the Conan
material in relation to one?
Well, in the sense that we've been talking about it is where one writer takes a character
and a world like the Hiborion Age created by another writer and writes new stories with
the same character in the same setting and he gets the full credit for the story but
the other writer has created the character and the historical setting.
Also DeKamp did something similar where he took incomplete Howard stories and changed
them into Conan stories which would be a pastiche of a slightly different kind but it's
the same principle operating and I'm not aware of any particular problems that arose except
of course he would by in doing this he would have to ensure that the estate received part
of his profits.
Do you think that Conan is popular enough or Howard's work is so popular that perhaps
we'll see an endless stream of books, pastiches by all sorts of authors?
It looks like that from what we were talking about the list of people who have done or will be doing these
and I don't know whether we've mentioned this but there is a planned Conan movie with Arnold
Schwarzenegger as Conan. If this is a huge success like Star Wars let's say that could give even
more interest to this kind of thing and we may see Howard going on forever with these pastiches being
I think it's possible that they would be continued because the original idea was to fill out Conan's life
you know have his life completely covered by the pastiches from I don't know the boyhood
but certainly all his adult life when he was an old King Conan and it's already gone beyond that
they filled out his life and then they're going back to you know this stage in his life he did
such and such so certainly they're not going to stop with what would be the logical life
in Conan so the potential to go on beyond is there.
You mentioned what we to fill in Conan's life where do we get information about Conan's life
unless it's been written in stories? Well what they did was start with what Howard had written in
his stories and say if he were such and such an age in this story and then a little bit later he was
in this part of the country and in Conan the Conqueror it mentions when he was a pirate
in the back in his pirate days and that's part of the way he solves the the crime against fact of
magical stone but so they would say well we'll write a pastiche about the pirate days
so that's what I mean when I say they filled out his life. That was the plan of Lancer Books
and that's what DeKamp was trying to do they were trying to arrange the books in
chronological order and then DeKamp and others were writing these stories to fill in the gaps
in his life but if you look at the Lancer Books I don't know how successful that was because they'll
have one edition of it will say number four in the complete Conan and the next edition will say
number five and it'll be the same book. Well originally though the explanation for that
bill is that they issued them just they numbered them by date of publication. The first one
published was number one the second one published and then they came up with this idea of the
chronological series and re-numbered them all. That explains that. In other words then the author of a
pastiche would be attempting to remain true to the character of Conan to what we know of his life
simply to fill in the details that Howard perhaps never got to. That's what I would expect now
it's true that maybe some of these writers have not necessarily been true to the character of
Conan as developed by Howard. Of course everybody thinks that he's the one who's doing the true
Conan stories. DeKamp thinks his are the true Conan stories because he doesn't have the violence
over you know he doesn't spend a lot of time describing the gore even though it's there
and because he doesn't have a lot of sex in his which Conan was practically asexual really even
though he had a queen. And a son didn't you have a son too? This was in the pastiche not
how I would try but then Andrew Offit I'm sure thinks that his is the true Conan but he has
Conan rape a girl which Robert E Howard would have probably committed suicide earlier rather than
write about rape you know this was not something that you would do. And Offit has done pastiches of
other Howard characters. Hasn't he done I'm not sure didn't he do Bran McMoron? He did. For Zebra Books.
Could you tell us a little bit about this this Hiborian age was this a created world of Howard
was it an actual time in history or was it totally imaginary?
I don't know if you can say it was totally imaginary but it was not an actual age it was a
prehistoric age so everything to imagine about it could be possible that's why I argued the
startups were not really necessarily in an aphrodisiac maybe they had them and then
after you know had they had to be rediscovered or something but they have actually done a map
and trying to trace out the places and they say it's amazing how well it fits over modern Europe
and so he kind of used a European landscape. Also he has written a lot about how fascinated he
was by the pics of this group of native to the island of Britain that would fight the Roman soldiers
and he certainly tried to use some of the idea of the pics and the barbarians fighting the
invading Romans who represented civilization but basically it is imaginary.
Doesn't he also taken some of his stories I think the King Cole series back to the
Atlantis or the Atlantean civilization? I think so it would be the King Cole stories those I don't
know whether those have been republished recently or not I know Lancer did some of those but I haven't
seen any of those in so long I'm not sure. How many Conan stories did he write that were published in
his lifetime? Originals was it just a couple dozen? The only full length book was Conan the Conqueror
and of course it was done serially but I would say probably not more than a dozen. Somehow I'd get the
number 18. Okay now that might be 18 counting the Conan words or something. I mean counting Conan the
published ones. The Brand-Mack Warren series I think he was the one who dealt with the Celtic
environment the Celtic heroes. Did he publish those weird tales also?
I'm sure there's probably were though or else. Where else would they fit? Yeah okay okay.
I'd like before we you know we'd like to say some more specifics if we can a little bit about his
work I think we probably got enough on his life do you think? Okay I'm going to start talking maybe
about the Conan heroes just some general comments about his writing try to get some things you know.
Make them do that thing. What? Make them into this thing right now. Oh I will yeah yeah.
It's been remarked by many people that every hero that Conan wrote about and of course
back out of mood again.
It's been said that every hero that Howard created for for his pulp material was
similar. They were all of the same type whether it was a western hero whether it was Conan
whether it was King Kahl back in the days of Atlantis. They all seemed to be of a type
and we remarked earlier that Howard seems to have put himself into those characters.
Do you think other people are fascinated by this type of character? What draws readers or what did
draw them and still draws them to this kind of this kind of hero? Dr. Crider do you think you have any?
Well let's talk about men. I often wonder if women read the Conan stories with any enjoyment. They
have to for research purposes like Dr. Lawson but we might ask her to admit whether she enjoys
him but this is the the perfect male fantasy figure. The lone hero with his sword or maybe in a western
story his pistol. I'm sure that the psychological critics can make a great deal out of this
and virtually irresistible to women but who nevertheless doesn't need the company of women
because he's self-sufficient. He's strong. He can overcome nearly anything and this this hero fits
in the westerns. I think of one of my favorite western characters Randolph Scott from years
gone by who almost always played the lone hero seldom if ever had a love story in his western
movie. I think it's a great fantasy figure that probably has a powerful appeal for men. Now I'm
not sure how much appeal you'd have for a woman and maybe even I probably shouldn't say this but
maybe even a sort of adolescent fantasy figure and I can particularly see adolescents enjoying
this kind of figure. That's when you go or at least a lot of people who go through that phase of
feeling outcast or different and a fantasy figure like this really give somebody like this something
to enjoy. Let Dr. Loughlin say what women might think about Conan. Well the point of being self-sufficient
I think that can appeal to anyone. At some time or another everyone wants to be self-sufficient
but whether or not women can really identify with Conan as an example of self-sufficiency is
another matter. I must say I don't particularly enjoy reading Conan. As I said the character
does not appeal to me greatly. I like the magical elements. I like the mean old whatever he was
the sorcerer who brought him back to life with the magic stone the one that was brought back to life.
Zaltotan I think. Yeah Zaltotan. I liked him better than I liked Conan you know the scary creatures
the Stephen King type hocus pocus but I don't find Conan very appealing. In fact I do find the whole
thing very adolescent even childish. Of course then again the target audience he was writing for at
that time was that audience. The pulp readers the ones who get down involved the pulp magazines
of the newspaper were probably mainly teenagers. Howard of course had a great I'm not sure what
word to use admiration for fascination with the barbarian perhaps that's why Conan has been one
of his most successful kind of heroes. Do you remember the story I think it was called The
Witch Will Be Born the one where Conan was crucified. I think that's one of the most powerful scenes in
the Conan series to get across the toughness. You know Conan is crucified you know his legs
his arms are nailed to the cross. They pushed the cross over and he tore himself out was it if I
remember. Isn't that the one where he bites the vultures head off. Yeah when he's crucified the vulture
comes and lands on him you know he realizing he's going to die and he just bites the vultures head
off. That was tough and what young man wouldn't love it. The taste of blood. No just the ultimate
tough hero. Of course I've read people who said they like Solomon Cain as much as if not more than
Conan. He was a weird sort of a hero wasn't he more of a from Puritan England. He was a misplaced
Puritan who drowned the world over. Didn't most of his stories take place in Africa.
And fighting African magic and a lot of those I believe.
But you know these stories that we're talking about all of them seem to me to have very little
that you know of a woman's element in them and women in the story just think about the character
of women in the stories. They're they're just sort of there and when you need them maybe for a love
scene or something. He really doesn't even have a love scene he just in Conan the Conqueror the
woman is there just to get him out of prison because as you said earlier she found him irresistible
when she saw him at the window three years ago as he drove by in a parade. Which is to take this up
to more modern things that's exactly the way that James Bond movies work all the women find him
irresistible and get him out of trouble another powerful adolescent fantasy figure.
Many people make a distinction between fantasy and science fiction and Howard
Howard of course is maybe the pulp fantasy writer Par excellence but he did write one science fiction
book or something that could be called science fiction El Murik. The hero was a Conan type hero
but he was a modern man who was projected to another planet. Similar to the way Burroughs did some of his
heroes and Carson of Venus and not Carson of Venus. Similar to the way he did his hero John Carter of
Mars. But Howard's didn't seem to think much of science fiction from what I've read he thought
that fantasy was a more imaginative more creative process and of course this is what he was involved
in. Do you think a reader can like appreciate the Howard type fantasy and perhaps a hardcore science
fiction at the same time? Are they distinct type two distinct? The two things are distinct the fantasy
and the science fiction but I think there are some readers who can enjoy both. I do and I think
I hate to think that I'm the only one. I like to read Larry Niven's Ring World and I like to
read Patricia McKillips books about the harvest and I like Robert E. Howard
Hall's and I like Peter S. Beagle the last unicorn and I like Paul Anderson's Tall Zero. I
read any of it. I'm not sure that everybody is that way. I think there are some readers who prefer
fantasy and there are some readers who prefer science fiction just as there are some who prefer
hard science fiction and I think that there's probably all sorts of in-group snobbism involved
in all of these things. The hard science fiction fan doesn't particularly think very much of those
people who like adventure type science fiction or maybe especially fantasy. This is putting you
on the spot this question but do you have any useful distinctions or definitions that would
separate the two science fiction and fantasy? Well it's not putting me on the spot since I've never
read any two definitions that agree. My own distinction is that science fiction deals more
with things that are probable and scientifically probable or at least possible whereas fantasy
deals more with impossible things, non-existent things I regard as impossible and non-existent
such as the power of magic, lost races and things of this nature and while I enjoy reading about it
I really don't think that that's within the realm of possibility whereas I think space travel is
but that might be putting me on the background. Some of you say well faster than light travel
is an impossibility is that fantasy or science fiction and I don't want to answer it.
Would you say that Conan, the Conan work of Howard, would that be typical sword and sorcery?
Would that be a proper term for it? That's probably what I would call it
because there's certainly plenty of sword play and there's plenty of sorcery involved in it and
others some people make another distinction what's referred to as heroic fantasy which I believe
is more in the Tolkien vein than the Robert E. Howard vein.
Dr. Loughlin didn't, hasn't the camp written sword and sorcery type fantasy himself?
He writes fantasy. I don't know if he has written sword and sorcery fantasy distinct from the Conan
books or not. His fantasies generally don't involve swords do they? Well he has. Books like the Tritonian
Reign for example are what I would classify as sword and sorcery but they're different from the
Conan stuff they are they still have the humor in them that the camp is noted for and of course the
camp has written straight historical novels like an elephant for Aristotle and golden
wind and things of that nature so he has but he's done other sword and sorcery besides the
Tritonian ring I'm sure if I could just think of the titles. But to me science fiction adventure
is really not that much different from fantasy because so so many of them that are called science
fiction adventure it takes place on another planet okay it could just as easily have been taking
place in a prehistoric time they just they're getting you away from the present to some imaginary
world now maybe their means of getting there are supposed to be more plausible than the means of
getting there would be in fantasy but the actual plot and the adventures that take place do not
seem to be that much different to me because so you use magic well is that really different from
astral projection now I guess the hardcore science fiction would be more plausible than fantasy but
a whole lot that goes under the title of science fiction adventure to me isn't very distinct from
fantasy well there's a whole area you can't separate in which you can't separate the two they blend
together David I just had a few more isolated questions Dr. Loughlin in your research you've
been tracking down people here in brownwood and cross planes in the all over the place
what have they had to say about Howard and what was he like well I've talked with
Lindsay Tyson in cross planes and Tevis Clyde Smith here in brownwood and Jack Scott who was the
newspaper editor in cross planes he was sent out as a reporter to cover the suicide he's the one
who found the suicide note in the typewriter the poem which I can't quote for you it was sort of
right from somebody else all bled all done pin the curtain or something like that
his friends his close friends are very defensive of him as I said earlier they keep saying
he wasn't crazy they objected to the term schizoid it's very painful for people like Lindsay Tyson
to talk about it perhaps because he loaned the gun to him it's it is very emotionally upsetting to
talk about it in much detail a great deal of guilt for everyone in cross planes who was a lot at
that time he didn't fit in with the other people people did think he was nutty and then he committed
suicide and I think a lot of people felt guilty particularly a friend like Lindsay Tyson and he
says he never mentioned suicide to me there was he was kind of considered a harmless kook I think
but after he committed suicide he didn't away transform that image in their minds he wanted to
with his suicide I think to do something heroic
he wanted to do something with suicide something like that right say that again I think in his
suicide he wanted to do something heroic that would transform him and the eyes and all the people
around him and to an extent it worked because instead of being a harmless kook he became a tragic
figure he inflicted a great deal of guilt on all the people in the area most of the people remember
him rather fondly some of the people do I describe his relationship with his mother is actually
perverse that and they say his mother seemed to want him to commit suicide
when she died she saw this as an example of his devotion you know nearly like a woman taking
praise from a a suitor from a boyfriend kind of oh you know he couldn't really do that but
in the same way she was trying to get him to she saw this very flattering that her son had this
devotion to him didn't you say that Tyson had helped Howard do some research on some of the
things that he wrote that was Smith Tevis Clyde Smith now Lindsey Tyson never had anything to do
with Robert's writing he kept his life and compartments and Lindsey Tyson was in his
compartment that didn't have anything to do with his intellectual life he didn't share any of his
intellectual life with Lindsey Tyson what type of research would his Smith have done for Howard
well he did the research for I believe the title is red blades of black cathay
and I'm sure that it was simply historical background now that's noted in that book
from Zebra entitled the book of Robert E. Howard he didn't do much research really he just read a
book or two I don't think it's considered very accurate portrayal
I understand that I read a reminiscence by E. Hoffman Price when he came to visit Howard and
cross planes I understand that Howard whether this was true or not thought he had enemies
and he would carry a gun in his car and Price was startled one time I think they were driving down
the road and and Howard slowed down into bush and reached over and touched his gun and said you
have to watch out you know I have enemies what was this all about I can't think a whole lot of
this was play acting here was the fellow from California who'd come out to see him and I think
he wanted to impress him with the old west image I really think and but for Howard his play acting
and his life never were really clear cut you know he may have convinced himself of these things
he would work when he was working out with punching a punching bag boxing his father would ask him
why are you doing this and he would say well I used to have to take a lot off people and they'd
push me around and now I want to be able to you know push back I want to be able to take care of
myself no one that I have talked with and I've gone back to his junior high days not to his
grade school days but I well yes I have I talked with Annie Newton Davis who knew him when he was nine
no one can remember anybody ever picking on Robert they can't remember him ever having been
involved in a scuffle in a schoolyard this seems to have been completely in his imagination
and how much of it was he just trying to impress E. Hoffman Price and how much was
he believed that price believed it the next paragraph after he related the episode he said
and the man was not kidding me I could tell he was serious he was kidding he was not kidding
that he believed there were enemies there or something you said you've gone back and talked
some of his teachers how in terms of formal education how much the Howard have now I did not talk with
his teachers from grade school it was Annie Newton Davis who was a neighbor who was older than he
was she was about 22 and he was nine he went through cross planes which had 10 grades and at this
time high school had 11 grades so he came around with high to finish his senior year you know to
get the 11th year which was a senior year then and this was not at all uncommon my great uncles
did the same thing they lived in small communities and they came into brownwood and they boarded in
brownwood to finish that last year of high school what was uncommon is that Howard's mother came
with him and kept house for him most of the boys came and kind of lived in a dormitory type situation
in boarding houses and had a high time my great uncle said that he certainly did then he went back home
to Howard went back home to cross planes for a couple of years and came back to Howard Payne
to get a business certificate it was a one-year program and I believe it took him a year and a
half or something like that took bookkeeping accounting nothing in liberal arts knowing
much of history or anything like that did he ever get a job that came out of such experience or such
coursework I believe he tried to get a job as a bookkeeper and lasted about a week or two he hated
all of his employers again that idea of a lacking discipline saying that he couldn't stand anyone
to be in authority algorithms that's why he hated school because he couldn't stand a teacher having
authority algorithm what in his did Howard get out of Texas wasn't he out of state for a while
in his travels I read once where he was in New Orleans for a few weeks or a brief period of time
back to take some medical training and I think something to do with
problems and so his father was there for some medical training at two line he lived there when
he was about 13 or 14 did he see the ocean did he have any experience with the ocean that you know
of that's a strange question but he did write some of his pulp fiction on sailors and sailing
Texas he may have been around the Gulf because I know he did go to south Texas
but I think he may have dipped into Mexico one time too but just like for two or three days
you've noted before I think I would agree with this at Howard's fiction seems to be wish fulfillment
in a lot of respects besides his close friends didn't he have a lot of correspondence with other
professional authors who were writing for the same kinds of pulp magazines he did was that in any
sense an attempt to see himself as part of a circle a group of like-minded men friendship for
instance Lovecraft he had a lot of correspondence with him I understand but never met him how many I
mean was this was it something that he needed was it something he you know sought out
needed it and Lovecraft needed it both neither one of them I had very many close friends where
they lived and certainly there weren't very many people who sympathized with Robert's literary
aspirations and he felt accepted by these people as I said earlier Dr. Howard would send his baby
pictures and his manuscripts to people who had never met Robert but who had corresponded with
him cardially and the father was so grateful for their pen pal friendship with Robert that he would
give them things that might get into the whole psychology of fandom though and the way because
science fiction fandom or fantasy fandom now the writers get together the fans get together and they
support each other and who else would there be and cross planes for somebody to talk to about
his literary aspirations now you're probably gonna have to cut this because you have people cutting
your throat but I think fandom today is very adolescent it seems like so many of the people
now not all of them we were there we're not we're mature but so many of the people you see
there's you can tell by looking at them somehow they don't quite fit in anywhere else they're not
exactly winners and so in this little circle they're a winner except for us except for us I may
now want to qualify them you're right I'll have to edit that out
most of the fans are losers
David that's all I would have I think we're you know myself
you
okay well listen I appreciate Mr. Baum is this person related to you your brother okay
um about what time would be the best time to call him to reach him during the day
or in the evening either one
mostly just about anything that you might know about Mr. Howard and what it was he was like
living in cross plane what it was like yes sir
okay well I'll try to get a hold of him then
okay
so
Okay, I'll try and give him a call then.
Okay, yeah, I've got it.
You don't remember any stories about Mr. Howard and what he was like.
Listen, I appreciate your time, Mr. Baum.
Yeah, mostly we're just looking for old stories about Mr. Howard, you know, what he was like, what he did in cross planes.
I don't know what he means.
Okay, I'll try and give your brother a call tomorrow then.
Yeah, oh, what you did was quite helpful. Yeah, listen, I really appreciate it.
Yeah, well, listen, we appreciate the information you did give us is tracking this thing down sort of like detective work.
And listen, we appreciate the information on your brother and we'll try and get in contact with him tomorrow.
Okay, thank you very much, sir, and thank you for your time. Okay.